docs/reference/file-formats.md, before:

# File Formats

## `rulesync/rules/*.md`

Example:

```md
---
root: true # true that is less than or equal to one file for overview such as `AGENTS.md`, false for details such as `.agents/memories/*.md`
localRoot: false # (optional, default: false) true for project-specific local rules. Claude Code: generates CLAUDE.local.md; Others: appends to root file
targets: ["*"] # * = all, or specific tools
description: "Rulesync project overview and development guidelines for unified AI rules management CLI tool"
globs: ["**/*"] # file patterns to match (e.g., ["*.md", "*.txt"])
agentsmd: # agentsmd and codexcli specific parameters
  # Support for using nested AGENTS.md files for subprojects in a large monorepo.
  # This option is available only if root is false.
  # If subprojectPath is provided, the file is located in `${subprojectPath}/AGENTS.md`.
  # If subprojectPath is not provided and root is false, the file is located in `.agents/memories/*.md`.
  subprojectPath: "path/to/subproject"
cursor: # cursor specific parameters
  alwaysApply: true
  description: "Rulesync project overview and development guidelines for unified AI rules management CLI tool"
  globs: ["*"]
antigravity: # antigravity specific parameters
  trigger: "always_on" # always_on, glob, manual, or model_decision
  globs: ["**/*"] # (optional) file patterns to match when trigger is "glob"
  description: "When to apply this rule" # (optional) used with "model_decision" trigger
---

# Rulesync Project Overview

This is Rulesync, a Node.js CLI tool that automatically generates configuration files for various AI development tools from unified AI rule files. The project enables teams to maintain consistent AI coding assistant rules across multiple tools.

...
```

## `.rulesync/hooks.json`

Hooks run scripts at lifecycle events (e.g. session start, before tool use). Events use **canonical camelCase** in this file; Cursor uses them as-is; Claude Code gets PascalCase in `.claude/settings.json`; OpenCode hooks are generated as a JavaScript plugin at `.opencode/plugins/rulesync-hooks.js`.

**Event support:**

- **Cursor:** `sessionStart`, `preToolUse`, `postToolUse`, `stop`, `sessionEnd`, `beforeSubmitPrompt`, `subagentStop`, `preCompact`, `afterFileEdit`, `afterShellExecution`, `postToolUseFailure`, `subagentStart`, `beforeShellExecution`, `beforeMCPExecution`, `afterMCPExecution`, `beforeReadFile`, `afterAgentResponse`, `afterAgentThought`, `beforeTabFileRead`, `afterTabFileEdit`
- **Claude Code:** `sessionStart`, `preToolUse`, `postToolUse`, `stop`, `sessionEnd`, `beforeSubmitPrompt`, `subagentStop`, `preCompact`, `permissionRequest`, `notification`, `setup`
- **OpenCode:** `sessionStart`, `preToolUse`, `postToolUse`, `stop`, `afterFileEdit`, `afterShellExecution`, `permissionRequest`

> **Note:** Rulesync implements OpenCode hooks as a plugin, so importing from OpenCode to rulesync is not supported. OpenCode only supports command-type hooks (not prompt-type).

Use optional **override keys** so tool-specific events and config live in one file without leaking to others: `cursor.hooks` for Cursor-only events, `claudecode.hooks` for Claude-only, `opencode.hooks` for OpenCode-only. Events in shared `hooks` that a tool does not support are skipped for that tool (and a warning is logged at generate time).

Example:

```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "hooks": {
    "sessionStart": [{ "type": "command", "command": ".rulesync/hooks/session-start.sh" }],
    "postToolUse": [{ "matcher": "Write|Edit", "command": ".rulesync/hooks/format.sh" }],
    "stop": [{ "command": ".rulesync/hooks/audit.sh" }]
  },
  "cursor": {
    "hooks": {
      "afterFileEdit": [{ "command": ".cursor/hooks/format.sh" }]
    }
  },
  "claudecode": {
    "hooks": {
      "notification": [
        {
          "matcher": "permission_prompt",
          "command": "$CLAUDE_PROJECT_DIR/.claude/hooks/notify.sh"
        }
      ]
    }
  },
  "opencode": {
    "hooks": {
      "afterShellExecution": [{ "command": ".rulesync/hooks/post-shell.sh" }]
    }
  }
}
```

## `rulesync/commands/*.md`

Example:

```md
---
description: "Review a pull request" # command description
targets: ["*"] # * = all, or specific tools
copilot: # copilot specific parameters (optional)
  description: "Review a pull request"
antigravity: # antigravity specific parameters
  trigger: "/review" # Specific trigger for workflow (renames file to review.md)
  turbo: true # (Optional, default: true) Append // turbo for auto-execution
---

target_pr = $ARGUMENTS

If target_pr is not provided, use the PR of the current branch.

Execute the following in parallel:

...
```

## `rulesync/subagents/*.md`

Example:

```md
---
name: planner # subagent name
targets: ["*"] # * = all, or specific tools
description: >- # subagent description
  This is the general-purpose planner. The user asks the agent to plan to
  suggest a specification, implement a new feature, refactor the codebase, or
  fix a bug. This agent can be called by the user explicitly only.
claudecode: # for claudecode-specific parameters
  model: inherit # opus, sonnet, haiku or inherit
copilot: # for GitHub Copilot specific parameters
  tools:
    - web/fetch # agent/runSubagent is always included automatically
opencode: # for OpenCode-specific parameters
  mode: subagent # (optional, defaults to "subagent") OpenCode agent mode
  model: anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
  temperature: 0.1
  tools:
    write: false
    edit: false
    bash: false
  permission:
    bash:
      "git diff": allow
---

You are the planner for any tasks.

Based on the user's instruction, create a plan while analyzing the related files. Then, report the plan in detail. You can output files to @tmp/ if needed.

Attention, again, you are just the planner, so though you can read any files and run any commands for analysis, please don't write any code.
```

## `.rulesync/skills/*/SKILL.md`

Example:

```md
---
name: example-skill # skill name
description: >- # skill description
  A sample skill that demonstrates the skill format
targets: ["*"] # * = all, or specific tools
claudecode: # for claudecode-specific parameters
  allowed-tools:
    - "Bash"
    - "Read"
    - "Write"
    - "Grep"
codexcli: # for codexcli-specific parameters
  short-description: A brief user-facing description
---

This is the skill body content.

You can provide instructions, context, or any information that helps the AI agent understand and execute this skill effectively.

The skill can include:

- Step-by-step instructions
- Code examples
- Best practices
- Any relevant context

Skills are directory-based and can include additional files alongside SKILL.md.
```

## `.rulesync/mcp.json`

Example:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "serena": {
      "description": "Code analysis and semantic search MCP server",
      "type": "stdio",
      "command": "uvx",
      "args": [
        "--from",
        "git+https://github.com/oraios/serena",
        "serena",
        "start-mcp-server",
        "--context",
        "ide-assistant",
        "--enable-web-dashboard",
        "false",
        "--project",
        "."
      ],
      "env": {}
    },
    "context7": {
      "description": "Library documentation search server",
      "type": "stdio",
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@upstash/context7-mcp"],
      "env": {}
    }
  }
}
```

### MCP Tool Config (`enabledTools` / `disabledTools`)

You can control which individual tools from an MCP server are enabled or disabled using `enabledTools` and `disabledTools` arrays per server.

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "serena": {
      "type": "stdio",
      "command": "uvx",
      "args": ["--from", "git+https://github.com/oraios/serena", "serena", "start-mcp-server"],
      "enabledTools": ["search_symbols", "find_references"],
      "disabledTools": ["rename_symbol"]
    }
  }
}
```

- `enabledTools`: An array of tool names that should be explicitly enabled for this server.
- `disabledTools`: An array of tool names that should be explicitly disabled for this server.

## `.rulesync/.aiignore` or `.rulesyncignore`

Rulesync supports a single ignore list that can live in either location below:

- `.rulesync/.aiignore` (recommended)
- `.rulesyncignore` (project root)

Rules and behavior:

- You may use either location.
- When both exist, Rulesync prefers `.rulesync/.aiignore` (recommended) over `.rulesyncignore` (legacy) when reading.
- If neither file exists yet, Rulesync defaults to creating `.rulesync/.aiignore`.

Notes:

- Running `rulesync init` will create `.rulesync/.aiignore` if no ignore file is present.

Example:

```ignore
tmp/
credentials/
```

Commit message:

feat: implement hooks for copilot
This:
- adds hooks feature for copilot

Notes:
Copilot has an unique hooks format, where it allows for defining the
command through `bash` or `powershell` fields. Depending on the platform
you're on, either `powershell` or `bash` are required.
There are different ways in which this mismatch could be resolved. This
chooses to read the user's platform and generate bash or powershell
accordingly. If the user wants to maintain both, then they'll need to
use copilot-specific overrides.

docs/reference/file-formats.md, after:

# File Formats

## `rulesync/rules/*.md`

Example:

```md
---
root: true # true that is less than or equal to one file for overview such as `AGENTS.md`, false for details such as `.agents/memories/*.md`
localRoot: false # (optional, default: false) true for project-specific local rules. Claude Code: generates CLAUDE.local.md; Others: appends to root file
targets: ["*"] # * = all, or specific tools
description: "Rulesync project overview and development guidelines for unified AI rules management CLI tool"
globs: ["**/*"] # file patterns to match (e.g., ["*.md", "*.txt"])
agentsmd: # agentsmd and codexcli specific parameters
  # Support for using nested AGENTS.md files for subprojects in a large monorepo.
  # This option is available only if root is false.
  # If subprojectPath is provided, the file is located in `${subprojectPath}/AGENTS.md`.
  # If subprojectPath is not provided and root is false, the file is located in `.agents/memories/*.md`.
  subprojectPath: "path/to/subproject"
cursor: # cursor specific parameters
  alwaysApply: true
  description: "Rulesync project overview and development guidelines for unified AI rules management CLI tool"
  globs: ["*"]
antigravity: # antigravity specific parameters
  trigger: "always_on" # always_on, glob, manual, or model_decision
  globs: ["**/*"] # (optional) file patterns to match when trigger is "glob"
  description: "When to apply this rule" # (optional) used with "model_decision" trigger
---

# Rulesync Project Overview

This is Rulesync, a Node.js CLI tool that automatically generates configuration files for various AI development tools from unified AI rule files. The project enables teams to maintain consistent AI coding assistant rules across multiple tools.

...
```

## `.rulesync/hooks.json`

Hooks run scripts at lifecycle events (e.g. session start, before tool use). Events use **canonical camelCase** in this file; Cursor uses them as-is; Claude Code gets PascalCase in `.claude/settings.json`; OpenCode hooks are generated as a JavaScript plugin at `.opencode/plugins/rulesync-hooks.js`.

**Event support:**

- **Cursor:** `sessionStart`, `preToolUse`, `postToolUse`, `stop`, `sessionEnd`, `beforeSubmitPrompt`, `subagentStop`, `preCompact`, `afterFileEdit`, `afterShellExecution`, `postToolUseFailure`, `subagentStart`, `beforeShellExecution`, `beforeMCPExecution`, `afterMCPExecution`, `beforeReadFile`, `afterAgentResponse`, `afterAgentThought`, `beforeTabFileRead`, `afterTabFileEdit`
- **Claude Code:** `sessionStart`, `preToolUse`, `postToolUse`, `stop`, `sessionEnd`, `beforeSubmitPrompt`, `subagentStop`, `preCompact`, `permissionRequest`, `notification`, `setup`
- **OpenCode:** `sessionStart`, `preToolUse`, `postToolUse`, `stop`, `afterFileEdit`, `afterShellExecution`, `permissionRequest`
- **GitHub Copilot:** `sessionStart`, `sessionEnd`, `afterSubmitPrompt`, `preToolUse`, `postToolUse`, `afterError`

> **Note:** Rulesync implements OpenCode hooks as a plugin, so importing from OpenCode to rulesync is not supported. OpenCode only supports command-type hooks (not prompt-type).

> **Note:** GitHub Copilot's format uses separate `powershell` and `bash` fields for hooks. Rulesync supports only a single `command` field and resolves this by emitting the command under the `powershell` key on Windows, and under the `bash` key on all other platforms.

Use optional **override keys** so tool-specific events and config live in one file without leaking to others: `cursor.hooks` for Cursor-only events, `claudecode.hooks` for Claude-only, `opencode.hooks` for OpenCode-only. Events in shared `hooks` that a tool does not support are skipped for that tool (and a warning is logged at generate time).

Example:

```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "hooks": {
    "sessionStart": [{ "type": "command", "command": ".rulesync/hooks/session-start.sh" }],
    "postToolUse": [{ "matcher": "Write|Edit", "command": ".rulesync/hooks/format.sh" }],
    "stop": [{ "command": ".rulesync/hooks/audit.sh" }]
  },
  "cursor": {
    "hooks": {
      "afterFileEdit": [{ "command": ".cursor/hooks/format.sh" }]
    }
  },
  "claudecode": {
    "hooks": {
      "notification": [
        {
          "matcher": "permission_prompt",
          "command": "$CLAUDE_PROJECT_DIR/.claude/hooks/notify.sh"
        }
      ]
    }
  },
  "opencode": {
    "hooks": {
      "afterShellExecution": [{ "command": ".rulesync/hooks/post-shell.sh" }]
    }
  }
}
```

## `rulesync/commands/*.md`

Example:

```md
---
description: "Review a pull request" # command description
targets: ["*"] # * = all, or specific tools
copilot: # copilot specific parameters (optional)
  description: "Review a pull request"
antigravity: # antigravity specific parameters
  trigger: "/review" # Specific trigger for workflow (renames file to review.md)
  turbo: true # (Optional, default: true) Append // turbo for auto-execution
---

target_pr = $ARGUMENTS

If target_pr is not provided, use the PR of the current branch.

Execute the following in parallel:

...
```

## `rulesync/subagents/*.md`

Example:

```md
---
name: planner # subagent name
targets: ["*"] # * = all, or specific tools
description: >- # subagent description
  This is the general-purpose planner. The user asks the agent to plan to
  suggest a specification, implement a new feature, refactor the codebase, or
  fix a bug. This agent can be called by the user explicitly only.
claudecode: # for claudecode-specific parameters
  model: inherit # opus, sonnet, haiku or inherit
copilot: # for GitHub Copilot specific parameters
  tools:
    - web/fetch # agent/runSubagent is always included automatically
opencode: # for OpenCode-specific parameters
  mode: subagent # (optional, defaults to "subagent") OpenCode agent mode
  model: anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
  temperature: 0.1
  tools:
    write: false
    edit: false
    bash: false
  permission:
    bash:
      "git diff": allow
---

You are the planner for any tasks.

Based on the user's instruction, create a plan while analyzing the related files. Then, report the plan in detail. You can output files to @tmp/ if needed.

Attention, again, you are just the planner, so though you can read any files and run any commands for analysis, please don't write any code.
```

## `.rulesync/skills/*/SKILL.md`

Example:

```md
---
name: example-skill # skill name
description: >- # skill description
  A sample skill that demonstrates the skill format
targets: ["*"] # * = all, or specific tools
claudecode: # for claudecode-specific parameters
  allowed-tools:
    - "Bash"
    - "Read"
    - "Write"
    - "Grep"
codexcli: # for codexcli-specific parameters
  short-description: A brief user-facing description
---

This is the skill body content.

You can provide instructions, context, or any information that helps the AI agent understand and execute this skill effectively.

The skill can include:

- Step-by-step instructions
- Code examples
- Best practices
- Any relevant context

Skills are directory-based and can include additional files alongside SKILL.md.
```

## `.rulesync/mcp.json`

Example:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "serena": {
      "description": "Code analysis and semantic search MCP server",
      "type": "stdio",
      "command": "uvx",
      "args": [
        "--from",
        "git+https://github.com/oraios/serena",
        "serena",
        "start-mcp-server",
        "--context",
        "ide-assistant",
        "--enable-web-dashboard",
        "false",
        "--project",
        "."
      ],
      "env": {}
    },
    "context7": {
      "description": "Library documentation search server",
      "type": "stdio",
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@upstash/context7-mcp"],
      "env": {}
    }
  }
}
```

### MCP Tool Config (`enabledTools` / `disabledTools`)

You can control which individual tools from an MCP server are enabled or disabled using `enabledTools` and `disabledTools` arrays per server.

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "serena": {
      "type": "stdio",
      "command": "uvx",
      "args": ["--from", "git+https://github.com/oraios/serena", "serena", "start-mcp-server"],
      "enabledTools": ["search_symbols", "find_references"],
      "disabledTools": ["rename_symbol"]
    }
  }
}
```

- `enabledTools`: An array of tool names that should be explicitly enabled for this server.
- `disabledTools`: An array of tool names that should be explicitly disabled for this server.

## `.rulesync/.aiignore` or `.rulesyncignore`

Rulesync supports a single ignore list that can live in either location below:

- `.rulesync/.aiignore` (recommended)
- `.rulesyncignore` (project root)

Rules and behavior:

- You may use either location.
- When both exist, Rulesync prefers `.rulesync/.aiignore` (recommended) over `.rulesyncignore` (legacy) when reading.
- If neither file exists yet, Rulesync defaults to creating `.rulesync/.aiignore`.

Notes:

- Running `rulesync init` will create `.rulesync/.aiignore` if no ignore file is present.

Example:

```ignore
tmp/
credentials/
```
